.TH zproxyCTL "8" "Jan 2010" "zproxyctl" "System Manager's Manual"
.SH NAME
zproxyctl \- control the zproxy(8) daemon
.SH SYNOPSIS
.TP
.B zproxyctl \fI-c /path/to/socket\fR [\fI-L/-l\fR] [\fI-S/-s\fR] [\fI-B/-b\fR] [\fI-N/-n\fR] [\fI-H\fR] [\fI-X\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.B zproxyctl
controls various aspects of the operation of the
.I zproxy(8)
program.
.SH OPTIONS
Options available:
.TP
\fB\-c /path/to/socket\fR
The path to the (Unix-domain) socket
.B zproxy
was configured to listen on for control. Your
.B zproxy
configuration file must contain the directive
.I Control "/path/to/socket"
for
.B zproxyctl
to work.
.TP
\fB\-a IP:PORT\fR
The ip address and port that
.B zproxy
was configured to listen on for control.
.TP
\fB\-L/-l n\fR
Enable/disable a listener. A disabled listener will stop accepting connection
requests.
.TP
\fB\-S/-s n m\fR
Enable/disable a service. A disabled service will not be used by
.B zproxy
to answer requests.
.TP
\fB\-B/-b n m r\fR
Enable/disable a back-end. A disabled back-end will not be passed requests to
answer. Note however that existing sessions may still cause requests to be
sent their way.
.TP
\fB\-N n m k r\fR
Add a session to service m in listener n. The session key is k and it points to
back-end r.
.TP
\fB\-n n m k\fR
Remove a session from service m in listener n. The session key is k.
.PP
The parameters n, m and r refer to the number assigned to a particular listener,
service and back-end in the listings. A listener number of -1 refers by convention
to the global context.
.TP
\fB\-H\fR
Try to resolve the addresses to symbolic names. Depending on your configuration,
this may require an active DNS.
.TP
\fB\-X\fR
Show the results in XML format.
.PP
When called without flags
.B zproxyctl
will print out a listing of the
.B zproxy
internal state.
.SH AUTHOR
Zevenet SL (info@zevenet.com).
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Report bugs to <zevenet-ce-users@zevenet.com>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2019-Today Zevenet SL.
.SH LICENSE
zproxy is licensed under GNU/Affero terns (AGPL-3.0).
.br
This is free software; see the source for copying conditions.  There is NO
warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

